BROTHER OX
Huge fey (shapechanger), lawful neutral
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 187 (15d12 + 90)
Speed 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
21 (+5) 18 (+4) 22 (+6) 17 (+3) 24 (+7) 19 (+4)
Saving Throws Str +10, Dex +9, Wis +12, Cha +9
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +10, History +8, Insight +12,
Perception +12
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
incapacitated, poisoned, stunned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP)
Bovine Passivism. No bovine creatures or wereboars can
willingly attack Brother Ox. They can be forced to do so through
magical means.
Charge. If Brother Ox moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a gore attack, the target takes an extra
11 (2d10) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 18 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Legendary Resistance (2/Day). If Brother Ox fails a saving throw,
he can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Brother Ox has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. Brother Ox’s weapon attacks are magical.
Rejuvenation. If he dies, Brother Ox’s soul reforms on the Astral
Plane. In 1d6 days, it inhabits the body of another bovine on the
Material Plane which becomes Brother Ox with all of the hp and
abilities thereof. Only killing every bovine on the Material Plane
will prevent this trait from functioning.
Shapechanger. Brother Ox can use his action to polymorph into
a Huge ox, a Medium bald human with a short, dark beard,
or back into his true Huge ox-headed humanoid form. His
statistics, other than his size, are the same in each form. Any
equipment he is wearing or carrying transforms with him.
Speak with Bovines. Brother Ox can communicate with any
bovine creature as if they shared a language.
ACTIONS
Multiattack. In ox or human form, Brother Ox makes three melee
attacks. In his true form, he makes three attacks: one with his
gore and two with his unarmed strike.
Gore (Ox or True Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit,
reach 10 ft., one target. Hit: 21 (3d10 + 5) piercing damage.
Unarmed Strike (Humanoid or True Form Only). Melee Weapon
Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5)
bludgeoning damage.
Ki Disruption (Recharge 6). Brother Ox makes one unarmed
strike against a creature to create an instability within the
target’s essence that lasts 2d8 days. This instability is harmless
unless Brother Ox uses his action to end it early. To do so,
Brother Ox and the target must be on the same plane of
existence. Brother Ox can use this action again to force the
target to make a DC 19 Constitution saving throw. On a failure,
the target is reduced to 0 hp. On a success, it takes 55 (10d10)
necrotic damage.
REACTIONS
Deflect Missiles (Humanoid or True Form Only). When Brother
Ox is hit by a ranged weapon attack, he can reduce the damage
he takes by 25 (1d10 + 20). If this reduces the damage to 0,
Brother Ox can catch the missile if it fits in one hand and he has
one hand free. If Brother Ox catches a missile in this way, he can
throw the missile as a ranged weapon attack as part of the same
reaction. The missile has +10 to hit, with a short range of 30
feet and a long range of 60 feet. On a hit, it deals 18 (3d8 + 5)
damage of a type appropriate to the missile.
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Brother Ox can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Brother Ox
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Move. Brother Ox moves up to his speed without provoking
opportunity attacks.
Wholeness. Brother Ox regains 10 hp, is cured of all diseases,
and ends one effect lowering his ability scores or hp maximum.
Brother Ox can’t use this legendary action again until the end of
his next turn.
Stunning Strike (Costs 2 Actions). Brother Ox makes one
unarmed strike. If it hits a creature, the target must succeed on a
DC 19 Constitution saving throw or be stunned until the end of
its next turn.