Deva Shaitan
Medium fiend (shaitan), chaotic evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 136 (16d8 + 64)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 18 (+4) 18 (+4) 17 (+3) 20 (+5) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Wis +9, Cha +8
Skills Intimidation +8, Perception +9
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)
Fiendish Weapons. The deva's weapon attacks are magical. When
the deva hits with any weapon, the weapon deals an extra 4d8
necrotic damage (included in the attack).
Innate Spellcasting. The deva's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 16). The deva can innately cast the
following spells, without providing material components:
At will: detect evil and good
1/day each: contagion, insect plague
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the deva can take
the Hide action as a bonus action.
Shadow Step. While in dim light or darkness, the deva can teleport
as a bonus action up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space it can see
that is also in dim light or darkness. It then has advantage on the
first melee attack it makes before the end of the turn.
Actions
Multiattack. The deva makes two mace attacks. It can use Life
Drain in place of one mace attack.
Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (1d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (4d8) necrotic damage.
Life Drain (3/day). Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one creature. Hit: 20 (4d8 + 2) necrotic damage. The target must
succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or its hit point
maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage taken. This
reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The target dies if
this effect reduces its hit point maximum to 0.
Change Shape. The deva magically polymorphs into a humanoid
or beast that has a challenge rating equal to or less than its own,
or back into its true form . It reverts to its true form if it dies. Any
equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or borne by the
new form (the deva's choice). In a new form, the deva retains its
game statistics and ability to speak, but its AC, movement modes,
Strength, Dexterity, and special senses are replaced by those of the
new form, and it gains any statistics and capabilities (except class
features, legendary actions, and lair actions) that the new form has
but that it lacks.