Greater Couatl
Large Celestial, Lawful Good
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 200 (19d10 + 95)
Speed 40 ft., fly 90 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
20 (+5) 20 (+5) 21 (+5) 20 (+5) 22 (+6) 20 (+5)
Saving Throws Con +10, Wis +11, Cha +10
Damage Resistances radiant
Damage Immunities psychic; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities petrified
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 15 (13,000)
Innate Spellcasting. The greater couatl's spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 18). It can innately cast the following
spells, requiring only verbal components:
At will: detect evil and good, detect magic, detect thoughts
3/day each: bless, create food and water, cure wounds, lesser
restoration, protection from poison, sanctuary, shield
2/day each: dawn, dream, greater restoration, scrying
1/day each: divine word, resurrection, temple of the gods
Ethereal Jaunt. As a bonus action, the greater couatl can magically
shift from the Material Plane to the Ethereal Plane, or vice versa.
Flyby. The greater couatl doesn't provoke an opportunity attack
when it flies out of an enemy's reach.
Magic Weapons. The greater couatl's weapon attacks are magical.
Shielded Mind. The greater couatl is immune to scrying and to any
effect that would sense its emotions, read its thoughts, or detect its
location.
Twist Free. The greater couatl automatically makes its saving
throws against paralysis and being restrained at the end of its turn
as long as it is not unconscious.
Actions
Multiattack. The greater couatl makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one to constrict.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) piercing damage and the target must succeed on
a DC 18 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 24 hours.
Until this poison ends, the target is unconscious. Another creature
can use an action to shake the target awake.
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
Large or smaller creature. Hit: 16 (2d10 + 5) bludgeoning
damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 15). Until this
grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the greater couatl can't
constrict another target.
Change Shape. The greater couatl magically polymorphs into
a humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating equal to or less
than its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form
if it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or
borne by the new form (the greater couatl's choice).
In a new form, the greater couatl retains its game statistics and
ability to speak, but its AC, movement modes, Strength, Dexterity,
and other actions are replaced by those of the new form, and
it gains any statistics and capabilities (except class features,
legendary actions, and lair actions) that the new form has but that
it lacks. If the new form has a bite attack, the greater couatl can
use its bite in that form.
Legendary Actions
The greater couatl can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
greater couatl regains spent legendary actions at the start of its
turn.
Bite. The greater couatl makes a bite attack.
Teleport. The greater couatl teleports up to 60 feet to an
unoccupied space it can see.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). The greater couatl casts a spell
from its list of innate spells, using a spell slot as normal.
Radiant Burst (Costs 3 Actions). The greater couatl emits a
burst of radiant energy. All allies within 20 feet of the greater
couatl regain 18 (3d8) hit points. All other creatures within 20 feet
must succeed on a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw, taking 18 (3d8)
radiant damage on a failed save, or half as much on a successful
one.