Nalfeshnee Captain
Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 207 (18d10 + 108)
Speed 20 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
22 (+6) 10 (+0) 22 (+6) 19 (+4) 12 (+1) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Str +11, Con +9, Wis +6, Cha +7
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The nalfeshnee's spellcasting ability is
Intelligence (spell save DC 17). The nalfeshnee can innately cast the
following spells, without providing material components:
At will: detect magic
3/day each: call lightning, dispel magic, polymorph (self only), slow
1/day: feeblemind
Magic Resistance. The demon has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The nalfeshnee uses Horror Nimbus if it can. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. If both
claw attacks hit the same creature, the target takes an extra 10 (3d6)
slashing damage and must succeed on a DC 19 Constitution saving
throw or be stunned until the end of its next turn.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 33
(5d10 + 6) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. Hit:
15 (3d6 + 5) slashing damage.
Horror Nimbus (Recharges 5-6). The nalfeshnee magically emits
scintillating, multicolored light. Each creature within 20 feet of the
nalfeshnee that can see the light must succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom
saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. If the initial saving throw
fails by 5 or more, the creature is paralyzed while frightened in this
way. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a creature's saving
throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the creature is immune
to the nalfeshnee's Horror Nimbus for the next 24 hours.
Ruthless Command (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1
minute, the nalfeshnee can issue a telepathic command whenever
a nonhostile creature that it can see within 30 feet of it makes an
attack roll. The creature takes 1d8 psychic damage and can add a
d10 to its roll provided it can understand the nalfeshnee. A creature
can benefit from only one ruthless command die at a time. This
effect ends if the nalfeshnee is incapacitated.
Teleport. The nalfeshnee magically teleports, along with any
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an unoccupied
space it can see.
Legendary Actions
The nalfeshnee can take three legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a
time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The nalfeshnee
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Claw. The nalfeshnee makes a claw attack.
Command. The nalfeshnee targets one ally it can see within 30 feet
of it. If the target can see and hear the nalfeshnee, the target can
make one weapon attack as a reaction.
Teleport (Costs 2 Actions). The nalfeshnee magically teleports,
along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to
an unoccupied space it can see.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). The nalfeshnee casts a spell from its
list of innate spells, using a spell slot as normal.