Ultimate Tyrant
Huge aberration, lawful evil
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 313 (25d12 + 150)
Speed 0 ft., fly 20 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 14 (+2) 22 (+6) 21 (+5) 19 (+4) 21 (+5)
Saving Throws Int +12, Wis +11, Cha +12
Skills Perception +11
Damage Resistances poison
Condition Immunities prone
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 28
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon
Challenge 22 (41,000 XP)
Antimagic Cone. The ultimate tyrant's central eye creates an area of
antimagic, as in the anti magic field spell, in a 150-foot cone. At the
start of each of its turns, the ultimate tyrant decides which way the
cone faces and whether the cone is active. The area works against
the ultimate tyrant's own eye rays.
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The ultimate tyrant's innate
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 20). As long as
the ultimate tyrant's antimagic cone is inactive, the ultimate tyrant
can innately cast the following spells, without providing material
components:
At will: darkness, detect magic, detect thoughts, see invisibility
3/day each: banishment, dispel magic, stoneskin
2/day each: globe of invulnerability, wall of force, move earth
1/day each: Abi-dalzim’s horrid wilting, power word stun
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 20
(4d8 + 2) piercing damage.
Command Beholders. The ultimate tyrant targets up to 4 beholders
within 60 feet that can see and hear the ultimate tyrant. The target
uses its reaction to make one bite or eye ray attack.
Eye Rays. The ultimate tyrant shoots four of the following magical
eye rays at random (reroll duplicates), choosing one to four targets it
can see within 120 feet of it:
1. Charm Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 20
Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by the ultimate tyrant for 1
hour, or until the ultimate tyrant harms the creature.
2. Paralyzing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 20
Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
3. Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 20
Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target can
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
4. Slowing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 20
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the target's speed is halved
for 1 minute. In addition, the creature can't take reactions, and it
can take either an action or a bonus action on its turn, not bofh. The
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success.
5. Enervation Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC
20 Constitution saving throw, taking 36 (8d8) necrotic damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
6. Telekinetic Ray. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a
DC 20 Strength saving throw or the ultimate tyrant moves it up to 30
feet in any direction. It is restrained by the ray's telekinetic grip until
the start of the ultimate tyrant's next turn or until the ultimate tyrant
is incapacitated. If the target is an object weighing 300 pounds or
less that isn't being worn or carried, it is moved up to 30 feet in any
direction. The ultimate tyrant can also exert fine control on objects
with this ray, such as manipulating a simple tool or opening a door or
a container.
7. Sleep Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 20
Wisdom saving throw or fall asleep and remain unconscious for 1
minute. The target awakens if it takes damage or another creature
takes an action to wake it. This ray has no effect on constructs and
undead.
8. Petrification Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC
20 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature begins to
turn to stone and is restrained. It must repeat the saving throw at
the end of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends. On a failure,
the creature is petrified until freed by the greater restoration spell or
other magic.
9. Disintegration Ray. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on
a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or take 45 (10d8) force damage. If
this damage reduces the creature to 0 hit points, its body becomes a
pile of fine gray dust. If the target is a Large or smaller nonmagical
object or creation of magical force, it is di sintegrated without a
saving throw. If the target is a Huge or larger object or creation of
magical force, this ray disintegrates a 10-foot cube of it.
10. Death Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 20
Dexterity saving throw or take 55 (10d10) necrotic damage. The
target dies if the ray reduces it to 0 hit points.
Legendary Actions
The ultimate tyrant can take 3 legendary actions, using the options
listed below. It can take only one legendary action at a time and only
at the end of another creature's turn. The ultimate tyrant regains
spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Antimagic Cone. The ultimate tyrant turns which way the cone faces
and whether the cone is active.
Command Beholders. The ultimate tyrant targets up to 2 beholders
within 60 feet that can see and hear the ultimate tyrant. The target
uses its reaction to make one bite or eye ray attack.
Eye Ray. The ultimate tyrant uses one random eye ray.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). The ultimate tyrant casts a spell
from its list of innate spells, using a spell slot as normal.
Eye Frenzy (Costs 3 Actions). The ultimate tyrant uses three
random eye rays.
Reactions
Redirect Antimagic Cone. When the ultimate tyrant sees a creature
within 150 feet cast a spell, the ultimate tyrant activates its antimagic
cone and points it at the creature.