Yochlol Elder
Large fiend (demon, shapechanger), chaotic evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 230 (20d10 + 120)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 14 (+2) 22 (+6) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Int +7, Wis +8, Cha +8
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Abyssal, Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP)
Rapid Shapechanger. The yochlol elder can use a bonus action to
polymorph into a form that resembles a female drow or giant spider,
or back into its true form. Its statistics are the same in each form.
Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts
to its true form if it dies.
Maddening Webs. A creature that starts its turn in a space filled
with webbing conjured by the yochlol elder's web spell takes 7 (2d6)
psychic damage.
Magic Resistance. The yochlol has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Spider Climb. The yochlol can climb difficult surfaces, including
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an ability check.
Innate Spellcasting. The yochlol's spellcasting ability is Charisma
(spell save DC 19). The marilith general can innately cast the
following spells, without providing material components:
At will: detect thoughts, web
3/day each: stone shape, telekinesis
1/day: dominate person
Web Walking. The yochlol ignores movement restrictions caused by
webbing.
Actions
Multiattack. The yochlol makes two melee attacks.
Slam (Bite in Spider Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach
5 ft. (15 ft. in demon form), one target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) bludgeoning
(piercing in spider form) damage plus 28 (8d6) poison damage.
Amorphous Flurry (Demon Form only, Recharge 5-6). The yochlol
makes four slam attacks.
Noxious Mist Form. The yochlol transforms into toxic mist or
reverts to its true form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is
also transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies.
While in mist form, the yochlol is incapacitated and can't speak. It
has a flying speed of 30 feet, can hover, and can pass through any
space that isn't airtight. It has advantage on Strength, Dexterity, and
Constitution saving throws, and it is immune to nonmagical damage.
While in mist form, the yochlol can enter a creature's space and
stop there. Each time that creature starts its turn with the yochlol
in its space, the creature must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution
saving throw or take 10 (3d6) poison damage and be poisoned
until the start of its next turn. Until this poison ends, the target is
incapacitated.
Teleport. The yochlol elder teleports, along with any equipment it is
wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space it can see.